---
title: What's the aim?

description: The reasons behind the creation of Bocchio's WebSite. How it came about, how it has been developed and what are my plans for his future.

paragraph:
    [
        "This site was born from the desire to have my own space where I could share my ideas and projects with others.",
        "I believe that social media are for some aspect restrictive and impose you too many limitations.",
        "<b>So, my main aim has always been to create a web space that was totally personal</b> and that I could organize in complete autonomy. While developing it, I realized his <b>enormous potential</b>, that was much more than a simple board of articles and posts...",
    ]

img:
    src: Scopo
    alt: What's the aim?
    provider: localSvg

createdAt: 2022-02-12T21:18:01Z
updatedAt: 2022-02-26T01:15:00Z

---

# What's the aim?

:prose-img{:src="img.src" :alt="img.src" :provider="img.provider"}

## A matter of needs

It was the beginning of 2021 when a particular need began to arise within me. I was in fact completing the "Gorlu the printer" project and I was realising more and more that I was finding it difficult to share its features and what I considered to be its strengths through the usual "Facebookian" social media. Even trivially, with the people who were most likely to be intrigued, **I could not communicate effectively** the content I wanted share.

The only way was to show it directly in person and to start a whole discussion that would explain it for what it was. This method actually worked well, but it limited the number of people to a very small circle. Even worse, to a circle of people somehow selected by me.

**I simply wanted arouse curiosity, maybe start a dialogue or a debate where openly discuss ideas, projects, advice or even receive criticism.** Yes, because it is precisely from criticism that I learn the most. They spur me on to do better, to make up for or fix my shortcomings. I do little with simple compliments. I always turn criticism into an opportunity for self-growth.

## The problem with social media

The various online platforms are made and designed for large numbers: their primary objective is to satisfy the widest possible range of people. The nuances of the individual (obviously) take a back seat.

Social media are therefore not very customizable in terms of how content is published. In particular, they are optimized for sharing almost exclusively photos and videos, while **text (probably also due to the laziness of the modern man who is used to too many comforts) is almost always completely neglected or minimized** to the famous _MAX 256 characters_...

However, I am firmly convinced that text still plays an important role today: if it is well written, I believe it is the best tool to convey large quantities of information in a few lines in an effective and direct manner. On the other hand, I think it’s clear to say that watching a video or an image is _less tiring_ than reading a page of text. **But even today, reading is necessary and cannot be neglected.**

## The website and freedom of expression

I decided then, once I had finished the printer, to take a break from my project list and create a personal website instead. I decided right away not to rely on any ready-made template of some CMS like WordPress or similar, but to start completely from a blank page and thus have the possibility to make that web space 100% mine. Because in the end **if a personal website doesn't reflect the person to whom it belongs, what kind of personal website would it be?**

Right from the beginning everything was **set up so that the main body of the site would be the Articles section**. As mentioned in the previous paragraphs, what I really wanted was to make the reader curious and at the same time to give a more or less in-depth description of the project. I therefore created _a page structure with the text as the main element, followed by images and videos._

Once I had created the basic skeleton, I then thought about creating the _forum, which for me is an essential tool for dialogue and the free expression of doubts, questions, and curiosity of the reader._

One day, however, I realized the enormous potential that I was not yet exploiting, and so it was born...

## Bocchio's WebSite

With the "Arduino Web Car" project I was in fact starting to write a client that would connect to an external service where my project server was hosted. Right after I started writing the client, it became clear to me that this approach meant that **if anyone wanted to try the project, they would have to download and install** several programming languages and a multitude of additional modules and so on. In short, not great.

The only way to get around this hassle was to move every program from local to online. Well, **then why not host everything on my own site? And that's how the Portals section** was born, i.e. the set of _all the WebApps needed to take full advantage of the functionalities of some projects._

I then realized the enormous potential that the whole website project had taken on. From a simple noticeboard where I could post a few one-off articles, the site had just become an online laboratory where I could experiment and create real applications that **everyone could access easily and immediately, using them in total freedom.**

## In the future

As of today, I have no plans to make substantial changes to either the structure or the contents of the site: I am completely satisfied with the work done so far and my only hope is that it will be appreciated in some way by those who wish to use it.

<div style="display: flex">
    :prose-button{url="/article" text="Explore articles"}
    :prose-button{url="/portal" text="Explore portals"}
</div>

For the moment, therefore, there is nothing left to do but to start playing with the site: to do this, use the two buttons above. Who knows, _maybe among one of my projects you will find inspiration for your own project..._ good reading!
