---
title: Private lessons!

description: Presentation page for private school tutoring of students in difficulty.

img:
    src: Ripetizioni
    alt: Private lessons!
    provider: localSvg

portalurl: /portal/private_lessons_management/

attachments:
  - name: mega
    url: https://mega.nz/folder/hUdRAICA#-FlE73MzduUN2QBIssHD8Q

createdAt: 2022-12-02T04:38:00Z
updatedAt: 2022-12-02T04:38:00Z

---

# Private lessons!

:prose-img{:src="img.src" :alt="img.src" :provider="img.provider"}

## Welcome!

If you've come this far, you may already know that **my name is Tommaso and I'm a mechanical engineering student (now in my 3rd year)**, previously graduated from the Liceo Scientifico (Applied Sciences option) Giovio.

I've always been interested in scientific subjects, **I've been tutoring high school students (scientific high schools) for 6 years now, with good/very good test results** from teachers.
In recent years, I have accumulated hours of self-taught experience in the field of computer science.

<br>

I experience teaching as a chance to take the student to the next level by contributing to his or her personal educational growth.
The fact that I can play an active role in this process satisfies me and gives me the motivation to always strive 100%.

## Lesson structure

I usually use an approach that starts with the problems in the book and then explains the theory based on the student's knowledge.
Whenever possible, I try to refer to tangible reality as much as possible in order to better fix the concepts written in the book.
Otherwise **I try to reason with the student in order to bring him/her to have as much internalised knowledge of the subject as possible and not mnemonic**.

Below you can see some passages from lessons I have given in the past year to various students I already follow (the topics range from 3rd grade to 5th grade).

:prose-img{src="/v1669946460/ripetizioni/Insiemi.jpg" caption="Cartesian product for sets"}

<!-- :prose-img{src="/v1669946459/ripetizioni/Matematica.jpg" caption="Parametric problems"} -->
<!-- :prose-img{src="/v1669946458/ripetizioni/Informatica.jpg" caption="Conversion B10 (DEC) -> B16 (HEX)"} -->

:prose-img{src="/v1669946458/ripetizioni/Informatica2.jpg" caption="B2 (BIN) -> B16 (HEX) conversion "}

<!-- :prose-img{src="/v1669946458/ripetizioni/Geometria.jpg" caption="Problems with solid figures"} -->

<!-- :prose-img{src="/v1669946458/ripetizioni/Geometria2.png" caption="Cartesian plane problems"} -->

:prose-img{src="/v1669946458/ripetizioni/Fisica.jpg" caption="Applied mechanics problems"}

:prose-img{src="/v1669946469/ripetizioni/QuesitoMaturit%C3%A0.png" caption="Baccalaureate solving"}

## Lesson times and modes

I usually do the **lessons online or directly at the student's home**. I am usually very **flexible with timetables** and despite university and other personal commitments/hobbies I always manage to meet the needs of all my students.

**My hourly rate is 15_euro_/hour of tuition, with the addition of something for moving if done at the pupil's home**.

In addition, one thing that my pupils (and especially their parents) appreciate is what I call a summary, which is an excel sheet where I keep track of precisely everything that is done in the lesson, as well as the various minutes and prices. Below is an example:

:prose-img{src="/v1669949576/ripetizioni/SchedaroRipetizioni.jpg" caption="Repetitions summary"}

P.S. if you had problems solving the price question that was on the hanging poster, I leave the solution here.

$$
Price = Sol_1 + Sol_2
$$

$$
Sol_1 =
\begin{bmatrix} 3 & -2 & 5 \end{bmatrix}
\begin{bmatrix} 2 \\ 6 \\ 3 \end{bmatrix}
= 3 \cdot 2 + (-2) \cdot 6 + 5 \cdot 3 = 6 + (-12) + 15 = 9
$$

$$
Sol_2 = \int_0^3 \int_0^{\frac{4}{3}x} 1\, dy\, dx = \int_0^3 \left. y \right|_0^{\frac{4}{3}x} \, dx = \int_0^3 \frac{4}{3}x \, dx = \frac{4}{3} \cdot \left. \frac{x^2}{2}\right|_0^3 = \frac{4}{3} \cdot \frac{3^2}{2} - 0 = 6
$$

And so we obtain:

$$
Price = 6 + 9 = 15 [\frac{_euro_}{h}]
$$

<!-- :prose-img{src="/v1669956210/ripetizioni/Risoluzione_quesito_locandina.jpg" caption="Poster problem solution"} -->

## How to get started

Very simple! Write to me at **(+39) 3425016560**, or click directly on the button below:

<a href="https://wa.me/3425016560?text=Hi Tommaso, I noticed your ad for lessons and would be interested in trying. Can we make an arrangement? Have a good day" rel="nofollow noopener noreferrer" target="_blank" class="button">Let's get in touch, write me on WhatsApp! </a>

And good study to all! :)
